draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir.md, before:

---
title: "Fiat-Shamir Transformation"
category: info

docname: draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "IRTF"
workgroup: "Crypto Forum"
keyword:
 - zero knowledge
 - hash
venue:
  group: "Crypto Forum"
  type: "Research Group"
  mail: "cfrg@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/cfrg"
  github: "mmaker/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols"
  latest: "https://mmaker.github.io/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols/draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir.html"

author:
-
    fullname: "Michele Orrù"
    organization: CNRS
    email: "m@orru.net"

normative:

informative:
  SHA3:
    title: "SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output Functions"
    target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.202.pdf

--- abstract

This document describes how to construct a non-interactive proof via the Fiat–Shamir transformation, using a generic procedure that compiles an interactive proof into a non-interactive one by relying on a stateful hash object that provides a duplex sponge interface.

The duplex sponge interface requires two methods: absorb and squeeze, which respectively read and write elements of a specified base type. The absorb operation incrementally updates the sponge's internal hash state, while the squeeze operation produces variable-length, unpredictable outputs. This interface can be instantiated with various hash functions based on permutation or compression functions.

This specification also defines codecs to securely map elements from the prover into the duplex sponge domain, and from the duplex sponge domain into verifier messages.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Fiat-Shamir transformation is a technique that uses a hash function to convert a public-coin interactive protocol between a prover and a verifier into a corresponding non-interactive protocol.
It depends on:

- An _initialization vector_ (IV) uniquely identifying the protocol, the session, and the statement being proven.
- An _interactive protocol_ supporting a family of statements to be proven.
- A _hash function_ implementing the duplex sponge interface, capable of absorbing inputs incrementally and squeezing variable-length unpredictable messages.
- A _codec_, which securely remaps prover elements into the base alphabet, and outputs of the duplex sponge into verifier messages (preserving the distribution).

# The Duplex Sponge Interface

The duplex sponge interface defines the space (the `Unit`) where the hash function operates in, plus a function for absorbing and squeezing prover messages. It provides the following interface.

    class DuplexSponge:
      def new(iv: bytes) -> DuplexSponge
      def absorb(self, x: list[Unit])
      def squeeze(self, length: int) -> list[Unit]

Where:

- `init(iv: bytes) -> DuplexSponge` denotes the initialization function. This function takes as input a 32-byte initialization vector `iv` and initializes the state of the duplex sponge.
- `absorb(self, values: list[Unit])` denotes the absorb operation of the sponge. This function takes as input a list of `Unit` elements and mutates the `DuplexSponge` internal state.
- `squeeze(self, length: int)` denotes the squeeze operation of the sponge. This function takes as input an integral `length` and squeezes a list of `Unit` elements of length `length`.

# The Codec interface

A codec is a collection of:
- functions that map prover messages into the hash function domain,
- functions that map hash outputs into a message output by the verifier in the Sigma protocol
In addition, the "init" function initializes the hash state with a session ID and an instance label.
For byte-oriented codecs, this is just the concatenation of the two prefixed by their lengths.

A codec provides the following interface.

    class Codec:
        def init(session_id, instance_label) -> hash_state
        def prover_message(self, hash_state, elements)
        def verifier_challenge(self, hash_state) -> verifier_challenge

Where:

- `init(session_id, instance_label) -> hash_state` denotes the initialization function. This function takes as input a session ID and an instance label, and returns the initial hash state.
- `prover_message(self, hash_state, elements) -> self` denotes the absorb operation of the codec. This function takes as input the hash state, and elements with which to mutate the hash state.
- `verifier_challenge(self, hash_state) -> verifier_challenge` denotes the squeeze operation of the codec. This function takes as input the hash state to produce an unpredictable verifier challenge `verifier_challenge`.

# Generation of the Initialization Vector {#iv-generation}

The initialization vector is a 32-bytes string that embeds:

- A `protocol_id`: the unique identifier for the interactive protocol and the associated relation being proven.
- A `session_id`: the session identifier, for user-provided contextual information about the context where the proof is made (e.g. a URL, or a timestamp).
- An `instance_label`: the instance identifier for the statement being proven.

It is implemented as follows.

    hash_state = DuplexSponge.init([0] * 32)
    hash_state.absorb(I2OSP(len(protocol_id), 4))
    hash_state.absorb(protocol_id)
    hash_state.absorb(I2OSP(len(session_id), 4))
    hash_state.absorb(session_id)

This will be expanded in future versions of this specification.

# Fiat-Shamir transformation for Sigma Protocols

We describe how to construct non-interactive proofs for sigma protocols.
The Fiat-Shamir transformation is parametrized by:

- a `SigmaProtocol`, which specifies an interactive 3-message protocol as defined in {{Section 2 of !SIGMA=I-D.draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols-00}};
- a `Codec`, which specifies how to absorb prover messages and how to squeeze verifier challenges;
- a `DuplexSpongeInterface`, which specifies a hash function for computing challenges.

Upon initialization, the protocol receives as input:
- `session_id`, which identifies the session being proven
- `instance`, the sigma protocol instance for proving or verifying

    class NISigmaProtocol:
        Protocol: SigmaProtocol = None
        Codec: Codec = None
        Hash: DuplexSpongeInterface = None

        def __init__(self, session_id, instance):
            self.hash_state = self.Codec(iv)
            self.ip = self.Protocol(instance)

        def _prove(self, witness, rng):
            # Core proving logic that returns commitment, challenge, and response.
            # The challenge is generated via the hash function.
            (prover_state, commitment) = self.sigma_protocol.prover_commit(witness, rng)
            self.codec.prover_message(self.hash_state, commitment)
            challenge = self.codec.verifier_challenge(self.hash_state)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.prover_response(prover_state, challenge)
            return (commitment, challenge, response)

        def prove(self, witness, rng):
            # Default proving method using challenge-response format.
            (commitment, challenge, response) = self._prove(witness, rng)
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            return self.sigma_protocol.serialize_challenge(challenge) + self.sigma_protocol.serialize_response(response)

        def verify(self, proof):
            # Before running the sigma protocol verifier, one must also check that:
            # - the proof length is exactly challenge_bytes_len + response_bytes_len
            challenge_bytes_len = self.sigma_protocol.instance.Domain.scalar_byte_length()
            assert len(proof) == challenge_bytes_len + self.sigma_protocol.instance.response_bytes_len

            # - proof deserialization successfully produces a valid challenge and a valid response
            challenge_bytes = proof[:challenge_bytes_len]
            response_bytes = proof[challenge_bytes_len:]
            challenge = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_challenge(challenge_bytes)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_response(response_bytes)

            commitment = self.sigma_protocol.simulate_commitment(response, challenge)
            return self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)

        def prove_batchable(self, witness, rng):
            # Proving method using commitment-response format.
            # Allows for batching.
            (commitment, challenge, response) = self._prove(witness, rng)
            # running the verifier here is just a sanity check
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            return self.sigma_protocol.serialize_commitment(commitment) + self.sigma_protocol.serialize_response(response)

        def verify_batchable(self, proof):
            # Before running the sigma protocol verifier, one must also check that:
            # - the proof length is exactly commit_bytes_len + response_bytes_len
            assert len(proof) == self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len + self.sigma_protocol.instance.response_bytes_len

            # - proof deserialization successfully produces a valid commitment and a valid response
            commitment_bytes = proof[:self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len]
            response_bytes = proof[self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len:]
            commitment = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_commitment(commitment_bytes)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_response(response_bytes)

            self.codec.prover_message(self.hash_state, commitment)
            challenge = self.codec.verifier_challenge(self.hash_state)
            return self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)

## NISigmaProtocol instances (ciphersuites)

We describe noninteractive sigma protocol instances for combinations of protocols (SigmaProtocol), codec (Codec), and hash fuction (DuplexSpongeInterface). Descriptions of codecs and hash functions are in the following sections.

    class NISchnorrProofShake128P256(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = P256Codec
        Hash = SHAKE128

    class NISchnorrProofShake128Bls12381(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = Bls12381Codec
        Hash = SHAKE128

    class NISchnorrProofKeccakDuplexSpongeBls12381(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = Bls12381Codec
        Hash = KeccakDuplexSponge

# Codec for Schnorr proofs {#group-prove}

We describe a codec for Schnorr proofs over groups of prime order `p` where `Unit = u8`.

    class ByteSchnorrCodec(Codec):
        GG: groups.Group = None

        def prover_message(self, elements: list):
            hash_state.absorb(self.GG.serialize(elements))

        def verifier_challenge(self, hash_state):
            # see https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/536.pdf, Appendix C.
            uniform_bytes = hash_state.squeeze(
                self.GG.ScalarField.scalar_byte_length() + 16
            )
            scalar = OS2IP(uniform_bytes) % self.GG.ScalarField.order
            return scalar

We describe a codec for the P256 curve.

    class P256Codec(ByteSchnorrCodec):
        GG = groups.GroupP256()

# Duplex Sponge Interfaces

## SHAKE128

SHAKE128 is a variable-length hash function based on the Keccak sponge construction {{SHA3}}. It belongs to the SHA-3 family but offers a flexible output length, and provides 128 bits of security against collision attacks, regardless of the output length requested.

### Initialization

    new(self, iv)

    Inputs:

    - iv, a byte array

    Outputs:

    -  a hash state interface

    1. initial_block = iv + b'\00' * 104  # len(iv) + 104 == SHAKE128 rate
    2. self.hash_state = hashlib.shake_128()
    3. self.hash_state.update(initial_block)

### SHAKE128 Absorb

    absorb(hash_state, x)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, a hash state
    - x, a byte array

    1. h.update(x)

### SHAKE128 Squeeze

    squeeze(hash_state, length)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - length, the number of elements to be squeezed

    1. return self.hash_state.copy().digest(length)

## Duplex Sponge

A duplex sponge in overwrite mode is based on a permutation function that operates on a state vector. It implements the `DuplexSpongeInterface` and maintains internal state to support incremental absorption and variable-length output generation.

### Initialization

This is the constructor for a duplex sponge object. It is initialized with a 32-byte initialization vector.

    new(iv)

    Inputs:
    - iv, a 32-byte initialization vector

    Procedure:
    1. self.absorb_index = 0
    2. self.squeeze_index = self.permutation_state.R
    3. self.rate = self.permutation_state.R
    4. self.capacity = self.permutation_state.N - self.permutation_state.R

### Absorb

The absorb function incorporates data into the duplex sponge state using overwrite mode.

    absorb(self, input)

    Inputs:
    - self, the current duplex sponge object
    - input, the input bytes to be absorbed

    Procedure:
    1. self.squeeze_index = self.rate
    2. while len(input) != 0:
    3.     if self.absorb_index == self.rate:
    4.         self.permutation_state.permute()
    5.         self.absorb_index = 0
    6.     chunk_size = min(self.rate - self.absorb_index, len(input))
    7.     next_chunk = input[:chunk_size]
    8.     self.permutation_state[self.absorb_index:self.absorb_index + chunk_size] = next_chunk
    9.     self.absorb_index += chunk_size
    10.    input = input[chunk_size:]

### Squeeze

The squeeze operation extracts output elements from the sponge state, which are uniformly distributed and can be used as a digest, key stream, or other cryptographic material.

    squeeze(self, length)

    Inputs:
    - self, the current duplex sponge object
    - length, the number of bytes to be squeezed out of the sponge

    Outputs:
    - digest, a byte array of `length` elements uniformly distributed

    Procedure:
    1. output = b''
    2. while length != 0:
    3.     if self.squeeze_index == self.rate:
    4.         self.permutation_state.permute()
    5.         self.squeeze_index = 0
    6.         self.absorb_index = 0
    7.     chunk_size = min(self.rate - self.squeeze_index, length)
    8.     output += bytes(self.permutation_state[self.squeeze_index:self.squeeze_index+chunk_size])
    9.     self.squeeze_index += chunk_size
    10.    length -= chunk_size
    11. return output

### Keccak-f\[1600\] Implementation

`Keccak-f` is the permutation function underlying {{SHA3}}.

`KeccakDuplexSponge` instantiates `DuplexSponge` with `Keccak-f[1600]`, using rate `R = 136` bytes and capacity `C = 64` bytes.

# Codecs registry

## Elliptic curves

### Notation and Terminology {#notation}

For an elliptic curve, we consider two fields, the coordinate fields, which indicates the base field, the field over which the elliptic curve equation is defined, and the scalar field, over which the scalar operations are performed.

The following functions and notation are used throughout the document.

- `concat(x0, ..., xN)`: Concatenation of byte strings.
- `bytes_to_int` and `scalar_to_bytes`: Convert a byte string to and from a non-negative integer.
  `bytes_to_int` and `scalar_to_bytes` are implemented as `OS2IP` and `I2OSP` as described in
  {{!RFC8017}}, respectively. Note that these functions operate on byte strings
  in big-endian byte order.
- The function `ecpoint_to_bytes` converts an elliptic curve point in affine-form into an array string of length `ceil(ceil(log2(coordinate_field_order))/ 8) + 1` using `int_to_bytes` prepended by one byte. This is defined as

      ecpoint_to_bytes(element)
      Inputs:
      - `element`, an elliptic curve element in affine form, with attributes `x` and `y` corresponding to its affine coordinates, represented as integers modulo the coordinate field order.

      Outputs:

      A byte array

      Constants:

      field_bytes_length, the number of bytes to represent the scalar element, equal to `ceil(log2(field.order()))`.

      1. byte = 2 if sgn0(element.y) == 0 else 3
      2. return I2OSP(byte, 1) + I2OSP(x, field_bytes_length)

### Absorb scalars

    absorb_scalars(hash_state, scalars)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - scalars, a list of elements of the elliptic curve's scalar field

    Constants:

    - scalar_byte_length = ceil(384/8)

    1. for scalar in scalars:
    2.     hash_state.absorb(scalar_to_bytes(scalar))

Where the function `scalar_to_bytes` is defined in {{notation}}

### Absorb elements

    absorb_elements(hash_state, elements)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - elements, a list of group elements

    1. for element in elements:
    2.     hash_state.absorb(ecpoint_to_bytes(element))

### Squeeze scalars

    squeeze_scalars(hash_state, length)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - length, an unsigned integer of 64 bits determining the output length.

    1. for i in range(length):
    2.     scalar_bytes = hash_state.squeeze(field_bytes_length + 16)
    3.     scalars.append(bytes_to_scalar_mod_order(scalar_bytes))

--- back

# Test Vectors
{:numbered="false"}

Test vectors will be made available in future versions of this specification.
They are currently developed in the [proof-of-concept implementation](https://github.com/mmaker/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols/tree/main/poc/vectors).

Commit message:

duplex sponge -> duplex + abstract changes
"duplex sponge" doesn't exist, it's just "duplex construction". Also made a few clarifying change to the abstract

draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir.md, after:

---
title: "Fiat-Shamir Transformation"
category: info

docname: draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir-latest
submissiontype: IETF
number:
date:
consensus: true
v: 3
area: "IRTF"
workgroup: "Crypto Forum"
keyword:
 - zero knowledge
 - hash
venue:
  group: "Crypto Forum"
  type: "Research Group"
  mail: "cfrg@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/cfrg"
  github: "mmaker/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols"
  latest: "https://mmaker.github.io/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols/draft-irtf-cfrg-fiat-shamir.html"

author:
-
    fullname: "Michele Orrù"
    organization: CNRS
    email: "m@orru.net"

normative:

informative:
  SHA3:
    title: "SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output Functions"
    target: https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.202.pdf

--- abstract

This document describes how to construct a non-interactive proof via the Fiat–Shamir transformation, using a generic procedure that compiles an interactive proof into a non-interactive one by relying on a stateful hash object that provides a duplex interface.

The duplex interface requires two methods: absorb and squeeze, which respectively allow one to write and read elements of a specified base type into and from the state. 
From the point of view of the Fiat-Shamir transformation, absorb (resp. squeeze) can be mapped to a prover sending a message (resp. a verifier producing a challenge).
The absorb operation incrementally updates the sponge's internal hash state, while the squeeze operation produces variable-length, unpredictable outputs. 
<!-- david: usually you instantiate the sponge/duplex with a permutation or a transformation, not with a hash function -->
This interface can be instantiated with various hash functions based on permutation or compression functions.

This specification also defines codecs to securely serialize proof-specific data into the expected input type of the duplex construction, and from the duplex domain into verifier messages.

--- middle

# Introduction

The Fiat-Shamir transformation is a technique that uses a hash function to convert a public-coin interactive protocol between a prover and a verifier into a corresponding non-interactive protocol.
It depends on:

- An _initialization vector_ (IV) uniquely identifying the protocol, the session, and the statement being proven.
- An _interactive protocol_ supporting a family of statements to be proven.
- A _hash function_ implementing the duplex interface, capable of absorbing inputs incrementally and squeezing variable-length unpredictable messages.
- A _codec_, which securely remaps prover elements into the base alphabet, and outputs of the duplex into verifier messages (preserving the distribution).

# The Duplex Interface

The duplex interface defines the space (the `Unit`) where the hash function operates in, plus a function for absorbing and squeezing prover messages. It provides the following interface.

    class DuplexSponge:
      def new(iv: bytes) -> DuplexSponge
      def absorb(self, x: list[Unit])
      def squeeze(self, length: int) -> list[Unit]

Where:

- `init(iv: bytes) -> DuplexSponge` denotes the initialization function. This function takes as input a 32-byte initialization vector `iv` and initializes the state of the duplex.
- `absorb(self, values: list[Unit])` denotes the absorb operation of the sponge. This function takes as input a list of `Unit` elements and mutates the `DuplexSponge` internal state.
- `squeeze(self, length: int)` denotes the squeeze operation of the sponge. This function takes as input an integral `length` and squeezes a list of `Unit` elements of length `length`.

# The Codec interface

A codec is a collection of:
- functions that map prover messages into the hash function domain,
- functions that map hash outputs into a message output by the verifier in the Sigma protocol
In addition, the "init" function initializes the hash state with a session ID and an instance label.
For byte-oriented codecs, this is just the concatenation of the two prefixed by their lengths.

A codec provides the following interface.

    class Codec:
        def init(session_id, instance_label) -> hash_state
        def prover_message(self, hash_state, elements)
        def verifier_challenge(self, hash_state) -> verifier_challenge

Where:

- `init(session_id, instance_label) -> hash_state` denotes the initialization function. This function takes as input a session ID and an instance label, and returns the initial hash state.
- `prover_message(self, hash_state, elements) -> self` denotes the absorb operation of the codec. This function takes as input the hash state, and elements with which to mutate the hash state.
- `verifier_challenge(self, hash_state) -> verifier_challenge` denotes the squeeze operation of the codec. This function takes as input the hash state to produce an unpredictable verifier challenge `verifier_challenge`.

# Generation of the Initialization Vector {#iv-generation}

The initialization vector is a 32-bytes string that embeds:

- A `protocol_id`: the unique identifier for the interactive protocol and the associated relation being proven.
- A `session_id`: the session identifier, for user-provided contextual information about the context where the proof is made (e.g. a URL, or a timestamp).
- An `instance_label`: the instance identifier for the statement being proven.

It is implemented as follows.

    hash_state = DuplexSponge.init([0] * 32)
    hash_state.absorb(I2OSP(len(protocol_id), 4))
    hash_state.absorb(protocol_id)
    hash_state.absorb(I2OSP(len(session_id), 4))
    hash_state.absorb(session_id)

This will be expanded in future versions of this specification.

# Fiat-Shamir transformation for Sigma Protocols

We describe how to construct non-interactive proofs for sigma protocols.
The Fiat-Shamir transformation is parametrized by:

- a `SigmaProtocol`, which specifies an interactive 3-message protocol as defined in {{Section 2 of !SIGMA=I-D.draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols-00}};
- a `Codec`, which specifies how to absorb prover messages and how to squeeze verifier challenges;
- a `DuplexSpongeInterface`, which specifies a hash function for computing challenges.

Upon initialization, the protocol receives as input:
- `session_id`, which identifies the session being proven
- `instance`, the sigma protocol instance for proving or verifying

    class NISigmaProtocol:
        Protocol: SigmaProtocol = None
        Codec: Codec = None
        Hash: DuplexSpongeInterface = None

        def __init__(self, session_id, instance):
            self.hash_state = self.Codec(iv)
            self.ip = self.Protocol(instance)

        def _prove(self, witness, rng):
            # Core proving logic that returns commitment, challenge, and response.
            # The challenge is generated via the hash function.
            (prover_state, commitment) = self.sigma_protocol.prover_commit(witness, rng)
            self.codec.prover_message(self.hash_state, commitment)
            challenge = self.codec.verifier_challenge(self.hash_state)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.prover_response(prover_state, challenge)
            return (commitment, challenge, response)

        def prove(self, witness, rng):
            # Default proving method using challenge-response format.
            (commitment, challenge, response) = self._prove(witness, rng)
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            return self.sigma_protocol.serialize_challenge(challenge) + self.sigma_protocol.serialize_response(response)

        def verify(self, proof):
            # Before running the sigma protocol verifier, one must also check that:
            # - the proof length is exactly challenge_bytes_len + response_bytes_len
            challenge_bytes_len = self.sigma_protocol.instance.Domain.scalar_byte_length()
            assert len(proof) == challenge_bytes_len + self.sigma_protocol.instance.response_bytes_len

            # - proof deserialization successfully produces a valid challenge and a valid response
            challenge_bytes = proof[:challenge_bytes_len]
            response_bytes = proof[challenge_bytes_len:]
            challenge = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_challenge(challenge_bytes)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_response(response_bytes)

            commitment = self.sigma_protocol.simulate_commitment(response, challenge)
            return self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)

        def prove_batchable(self, witness, rng):
            # Proving method using commitment-response format.
            # Allows for batching.
            (commitment, challenge, response) = self._prove(witness, rng)
            # running the verifier here is just a sanity check
            assert self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)
            return self.sigma_protocol.serialize_commitment(commitment) + self.sigma_protocol.serialize_response(response)

        def verify_batchable(self, proof):
            # Before running the sigma protocol verifier, one must also check that:
            # - the proof length is exactly commit_bytes_len + response_bytes_len
            assert len(proof) == self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len + self.sigma_protocol.instance.response_bytes_len

            # - proof deserialization successfully produces a valid commitment and a valid response
            commitment_bytes = proof[:self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len]
            response_bytes = proof[self.sigma_protocol.instance.commit_bytes_len:]
            commitment = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_commitment(commitment_bytes)
            response = self.sigma_protocol.deserialize_response(response_bytes)

            self.codec.prover_message(self.hash_state, commitment)
            challenge = self.codec.verifier_challenge(self.hash_state)
            return self.sigma_protocol.verifier(commitment, challenge, response)

## NISigmaProtocol instances (ciphersuites)

We describe noninteractive sigma protocol instances for combinations of protocols (SigmaProtocol), codec (Codec), and hash fuction (DuplexSpongeInterface). Descriptions of codecs and hash functions are in the following sections.

    class NISchnorrProofShake128P256(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = P256Codec
        Hash = SHAKE128

    class NISchnorrProofShake128Bls12381(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = Bls12381Codec
        Hash = SHAKE128

    class NISchnorrProofKeccakDuplexSpongeBls12381(NISigmaProtocol):
        Protocol = SchnorrProof
        Codec = Bls12381Codec
        Hash = KeccakDuplexSponge

# Codec for Schnorr proofs {#group-prove}

We describe a codec for Schnorr proofs over groups of prime order `p` where `Unit = u8`.

    class ByteSchnorrCodec(Codec):
        GG: groups.Group = None

        def prover_message(self, elements: list):
            hash_state.absorb(self.GG.serialize(elements))

        def verifier_challenge(self, hash_state):
            # see https://eprint.iacr.org/2025/536.pdf, Appendix C.
            uniform_bytes = hash_state.squeeze(
                self.GG.ScalarField.scalar_byte_length() + 16
            )
            scalar = OS2IP(uniform_bytes) % self.GG.ScalarField.order
            return scalar

We describe a codec for the P256 curve.

    class P256Codec(ByteSchnorrCodec):
        GG = groups.GroupP256()

# Duplex Interfaces

## SHAKE128

SHAKE128 is a variable-length hash function based on the Keccak sponge construction {{SHA3}}. It belongs to the SHA-3 family but offers a flexible output length, and provides 128 bits of security against collision attacks, regardless of the output length requested.

### Initialization

    new(self, iv)

    Inputs:

    - iv, a byte array

    Outputs:

    -  a hash state interface

    1. initial_block = iv + b'\00' * 104  # len(iv) + 104 == SHAKE128 rate
    2. self.hash_state = hashlib.shake_128()
    3. self.hash_state.update(initial_block)

### SHAKE128 Absorb

    absorb(hash_state, x)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, a hash state
    - x, a byte array

    1. h.update(x)

### SHAKE128 Squeeze

    squeeze(hash_state, length)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - length, the number of elements to be squeezed

    1. return self.hash_state.copy().digest(length)

## Duplex

A duplex in overwrite mode is based on a permutation function that operates on a state vector. It implements the `DuplexSpongeInterface` and maintains internal state to support incremental absorption and variable-length output generation.

### Initialization

This is the constructor for a duplex object. It is initialized with a 32-byte initialization vector.

    new(iv)

    Inputs:
    - iv, a 32-byte initialization vector

    Procedure:
    1. self.absorb_index = 0
    2. self.squeeze_index = self.permutation_state.R
    3. self.rate = self.permutation_state.R
    4. self.capacity = self.permutation_state.N - self.permutation_state.R

### Absorb

The absorb function incorporates data into the duplex state using overwrite mode.

    absorb(self, input)

    Inputs:
    - self, the current duplex object
    - input, the input bytes to be absorbed

    Procedure:
    1. self.squeeze_index = self.rate
    2. while len(input) != 0:
    3.     if self.absorb_index == self.rate:
    4.         self.permutation_state.permute()
    5.         self.absorb_index = 0
    6.     chunk_size = min(self.rate - self.absorb_index, len(input))
    7.     next_chunk = input[:chunk_size]
    8.     self.permutation_state[self.absorb_index:self.absorb_index + chunk_size] = next_chunk
    9.     self.absorb_index += chunk_size
    10.    input = input[chunk_size:]

### Squeeze

The squeeze operation extracts output elements from the sponge state, which are uniformly distributed and can be used as a digest, key stream, or other cryptographic material.

    squeeze(self, length)

    Inputs:
    - self, the current duplex object
    - length, the number of bytes to be squeezed out of the sponge

    Outputs:
    - digest, a byte array of `length` elements uniformly distributed

    Procedure:
    1. output = b''
    2. while length != 0:
    3.     if self.squeeze_index == self.rate:
    4.         self.permutation_state.permute()
    5.         self.squeeze_index = 0
    6.         self.absorb_index = 0
    7.     chunk_size = min(self.rate - self.squeeze_index, length)
    8.     output += bytes(self.permutation_state[self.squeeze_index:self.squeeze_index+chunk_size])
    9.     self.squeeze_index += chunk_size
    10.    length -= chunk_size
    11. return output

### Keccak-f\[1600\] Implementation

`Keccak-f` is the permutation function underlying {{SHA3}}.

`KeccakDuplexSponge` instantiates `DuplexSponge` with `Keccak-f[1600]`, using rate `R = 136` bytes and capacity `C = 64` bytes.

# Codecs registry

## Elliptic curves

### Notation and Terminology {#notation}

For an elliptic curve, we consider two fields, the coordinate fields, which indicates the base field, the field over which the elliptic curve equation is defined, and the scalar field, over which the scalar operations are performed.

The following functions and notation are used throughout the document.

- `concat(x0, ..., xN)`: Concatenation of byte strings.
- `bytes_to_int` and `scalar_to_bytes`: Convert a byte string to and from a non-negative integer.
  `bytes_to_int` and `scalar_to_bytes` are implemented as `OS2IP` and `I2OSP` as described in
  {{!RFC8017}}, respectively. Note that these functions operate on byte strings
  in big-endian byte order.
- The function `ecpoint_to_bytes` converts an elliptic curve point in affine-form into an array string of length `ceil(ceil(log2(coordinate_field_order))/ 8) + 1` using `int_to_bytes` prepended by one byte. This is defined as

      ecpoint_to_bytes(element)
      Inputs:
      - `element`, an elliptic curve element in affine form, with attributes `x` and `y` corresponding to its affine coordinates, represented as integers modulo the coordinate field order.

      Outputs:

      A byte array

      Constants:

      field_bytes_length, the number of bytes to represent the scalar element, equal to `ceil(log2(field.order()))`.

      1. byte = 2 if sgn0(element.y) == 0 else 3
      2. return I2OSP(byte, 1) + I2OSP(x, field_bytes_length)

### Absorb scalars

    absorb_scalars(hash_state, scalars)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - scalars, a list of elements of the elliptic curve's scalar field

    Constants:

    - scalar_byte_length = ceil(384/8)

    1. for scalar in scalars:
    2.     hash_state.absorb(scalar_to_bytes(scalar))

Where the function `scalar_to_bytes` is defined in {{notation}}

### Absorb elements

    absorb_elements(hash_state, elements)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - elements, a list of group elements

    1. for element in elements:
    2.     hash_state.absorb(ecpoint_to_bytes(element))

### Squeeze scalars

    squeeze_scalars(hash_state, length)

    Inputs:

    - hash_state, the hash state
    - length, an unsigned integer of 64 bits determining the output length.

    1. for i in range(length):
    2.     scalar_bytes = hash_state.squeeze(field_bytes_length + 16)
    3.     scalars.append(bytes_to_scalar_mod_order(scalar_bytes))

--- back

# Test Vectors
{:numbered="false"}

Test vectors will be made available in future versions of this specification.
They are currently developed in the [proof-of-concept implementation](https://github.com/mmaker/draft-irtf-cfrg-sigma-protocols/tree/main/poc/vectors).
